

This a model from the article:  
** Hypoxia-dependent sequestration of an oxygen sensor by a widespread structural motif can shape the hypoxic response - a predictive kinetic model **   
Bernhard Schmierer, Béla Novák1 and Christopher J Schofield _BMC Systems
Biology_2010, 4:139 [20955552](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20955552),  
**Abstract:**   
Background  
The activity of the heterodimeric transcription factor hypoxia inducible
factor (HIF) is regulated by the post-translational, oxygen-dependent
hydroxylation of its α-subunit by members of the prolyl hydroxylase domain
(PHD or EGLN)-family and by factor inhibiting HIF (FIH). PHD-dependent
hydroxylation targets HIFα for rapid proteasomal degradation; FIH-catalysed
asparaginyl-hydroxylation of the C-terminal transactivation domain (CAD) of
HIFα suppresses the CAD-dependent subset of the extensive transcriptional
responses induced by HIF. FIH can also hydroxylate ankyrin-repeat domain (ARD)
proteins, a large group of proteins which are functionally unrelated but share
common structural features. Competition by ARD proteins for FIH is
hypothesised to affect FIH activity towards HIFα; however the extent of this
competition and its effect on the HIF-dependent hypoxic response are unknown.  
Results  
To analyse if and in which way the FIH/ARD protein interaction affects HIF-
activity, we created a rate equation model. Our model predicts that an oxygen-
regulated sequestration of FIH by ARD proteins significantly shapes the
input/output characteristics of the HIF system. The FIH/ARD protein
interaction is predicted to create an oxygen threshold for HIFα CAD-
hydroxylation and to significantly sharpen the signal/response curves, which
not only focuses HIFα CAD-hydroxylation into a defined range of oxygen
tensions, but also makes the response ultrasensitive to varying oxygen
tensions. Our model further suggests that the hydroxylation status of the ARD
protein pool can encode the strength and the duration of a hypoxic episode,
which may allow cells to memorise these features for a certain time period
after reoxygenation.  
Conclusions  
The FIH/ARD protein interaction has the potential to contribute to oxygen-
range finding, can sensitise the response to changes in oxygen levels, and can
provide a memory of the strength and the duration of a hypoxic episode. These
emergent properties are predicted to significantly shape the characteristics
of HIF activity in animal cells. We argue that the FIH/ARD interaction should
be taken into account in studies of the effect of pharmacological inhibition
of the HIF-hydroxylases and propose that the interaction of a signalling
sensor with a large group of proteins might be a general mechanism for the
regulation of signalling pathways.

There are there models described in the paper. 1) Skeleton Model 1 (SKM1) -
HIFα CAD-hydroxylation in the absence of the FIH/AR-interaction. 2) Skeleton
Model 2 (SKM2) - FIG sequestration by ARD proteins and oxygen-dependent FIH-
release. 3) Full Model (Fusion of SKM1 and SKM2) - the effects of the FIH/ARD
proteins interaction on HIFα CAD-hydroxylation.

This model corresponds to the "Full Model" described in the paper. The model
reproduces figure 5 of the publication.

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
For more information see the [terms of
use](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/legal.html).  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Novère N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)

